Alright, so now
we're going to implement merge sort,
and as I said in the slides, there is recursion involved,
so if you're having a problem understanding what's going on,
just go back and review the slides about merge sort
when we step through to sort by hand,
and you can also go back and review
the video on recursion.
Alright, so, I'm going to write two methods.
One called merge sort and this is
the merge sort implementation,
and it's the method that's going to call itself recursively.
And then I'm gonna write a second method called merge.
And that will be doing the merging step.
So let's get right to it.
So I'm gonna say public static void merge sort
and we're gonna pass the array that we wanna sort.
And we're gonna pass the start index
and an end index.
Okay, so the first thing we're gonna do here is,
for recursion, as I said, we need a breaking condition.
And this is going to be a recursive method,
so we need to know when to break out of the recursion
and we're gonna break out of the recursion
when this method is called with a one element array,
because when we have a one element array,
there's nothing to be done, by definition,
a one element array is sorted.
So we're going to say if and minus start,
is less than two, we just return.
And this will break the recursion,
so if we've been calling this method recursively,
the moment end minus start is less than two
meaning that we have a one element array,
we'll return and then the call to merge sort,
that's waiting for this call to return will be able
to continue executing, and then the call
that's waiting for that call to return
will be able to continue executing et cetera.
Like I said, you can go back and review the video
on recursion if you don't understand what I'm talking about.
Okay, so let's assume we don't have a one element array,
we have two or more elements, well then we have work to do.
And so the first thing we're going to do is partition
the array that we've been past,
now the array can be a sub array.
For example, on the first invocation
we're gonna get the entire array.
But on the second invocation of this,
we're just going to be getting this part.
This left array.
And so, in that case when we partition,
we're gonna be partitioning this array
just as we saw on the slides.
So what do we mean by partition,
well we basically just want to figure out
what the start and end indices are.
That's all we need to do in the partition phase,
because it's a logical partition,
we're not creating any new array instances.
And so let's do the partitioning,
so we'll say, int mid,
equals, and as we saw in the slides,
that will be start plus end, over two.
And so, for the first invocation,
start is gonna be zero, end is going to be seven,
because as I mentioned in the slides,
end is always one grader than the last valid index
of the partition that you want to sort,
and so we'll have zero plus seven over two, which is three.
And so at this point, hard to believe,
but we've partitioned the array,
we basically said that yeah, the mid point is three,
so we're gonna throw position zero, one and two
into the left array.
And we're gonna throw positions three, four,
five and six into the right array.
And now what do we wanna do?
We want to do a merge sort on the left partition.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So we'll say merge sort.
Input, it's always gonna be the same input array
'cause we're doing logical partitioning.
And then, the left array starts at position zero,
so it'll be the same start index.
And the end index for the left array will be mid.
Remember that in this implementation
the end index is always one greater
than the last valid index in the array.
I'm going to copy this,
and move it down here.
As a comment, so we can see it.
As we're working on this method.
And so, as I said in the first invocation,
we're gonna come in, end minus start,
seven minus zero is seven, so,
we definitely have more than one element in the partition
that we're working with.
Mid will be zero plus seven over two,
which is three.
And in this implementation we throw any extra elements
into the right partition.
And so we're gonna say, okay, so the left partition
is gonna consist of the indices from zero to two.
For the end position we always pass one greater.
And so that'll be mid, which is three.
So by passing start to zero end is three
we're saying we want position zero to two,
to go into the left partition.
And so we've handled the left partition now
because this is recursive,
when this call returns as we saw in the slides,
this entire array, left side, left sub array
will have been handled.
And so this call when we come in,
is gonna result in another call to merge sort,
another call to merge sort, until this guy has been
partitioned down to one element arrays
and then merged, and we'll get to that in a minute.
So by the time we come back,
these three elements will have been sorted.
So, the partition has been done,
the merge has been done and they're sorted
so tat this point, the left part of the array is sorted
and so we still need to handle the right part of the array.
So we'll call merge sort again with input,
this time, our start index will be mid,
and our end index will be end.
And so for the left array, we have a start index of zero
and an end index of three so we wanna handle
position zero to two.
And for the right part of the array, well,
we want these guys in the right part of the array,
so that's starting at position three,
position mid, and then we pass ending again, seven,
because we always pass one greater than the last valid index
in their partition, so that means indices three to six,
are in the right partition and by the time
this guy returns, this entire array will have been handled,
will have been partitioned down and sorted.
And so when we get to this point, when these two merge sort
calls complete, the elements in the first three positions
are in sorted order and the elements in the last four
positions are in sorted order and our final step, of course,
is to merge the left and right partitions.
And both of those partitions and now sorted, remember,
we always merge sorted partitions.
And so this is where we're gonna call our merge method.
And it's gonna take the input array,
the start index, the mid index and the end index.
And so because of recursion, when we come in,
with the full array, and then we're gonna call merge sort
with this partition, when we call merge sort
with this partition and it enters again,
it will call merge sort with this guy.
Remember that from the slides this guy,
the left array for this guy will be 20.
And then it will call merge sort with 35 and minus 15.
And that'll come back in and that's gonna split
these guys into two on element arrays.
And after that's been done, if we're working
with this array again, so after 20 has been handled here,
and 35 and minus 15 has been handled here,
then we'll merge those two arrays.
And then this call will return and at that point
the merge sort for the entire array
will be able to resume.
And then we'll handle the right side.
So as I said, if you're having a problem
understanding that we're going down
the recursion rabbit hole, each time we call this,
we're gonna completely process that,
or the left side, for the first invocation
will completely process that.
When we call this, we'll completely process the right side
and so by the time we hit this merge,
the left partition has been fully handled,
it's been partitioned, merged and so it's sorted
and the right side has been handled,
so it's been partitioned ad merged, so it's sorted.
And so, once we merge the left and right,
we have completely handled whatever partition
we called the method with.
And so when we call it with the entire array,
by the time this is returned and that's returned,
we're in a position to just merge the left and right,
and our array will be sorted.
So let's write the merge method.
So public static void merge.
And it takes an input array.
Start index, mid index, and end index.
Let me pull this up.
Okay, so I'm gonna copy this down again,
so I can refer to it, without having to scroll up and down.
Alright, so I said in the slides that the implementation
I'm going to show you has a couple of optimizations
and here's the first one.
So, we're gonna say if input mid minus one,
is less than or equal to input mid.
We're done.
We don't actually have to do any merging.
Now what the heck does this mean,
what is it doing?
Well, as we've said, we're always merging sorted arrays.
So, when we call merge the left partition
that we're merging is sorted.
And the right partition is sorted.
And we know that mid is the first element
in the right side and it's one greater
than the last element in the left side.
And so, input mid minus one,
is the last element in the left partition.
And input mid is the first element in the right partition.
Now, if the last element in the left partition
is less than or equal the first element
in the right partition that means all the elements
in the left partition are less than or equal
than the smallest element in the right partition,
because both of these guys are sorted.
And so, if the last element in the left partition
is, let's say 20, and the first element
in the right partition is 25,
then we know that all the elements in the right partition
are gonna be greater than or equal to all the elements
in the left partition, because these are sorted.
So if the last guy is 20, everything else in this array
is equal to 20 or less.
And if the first guy in the right array is 25,
then everything else in the right array is greater than
or equal to 25.
And so essentially we have the situation here that
if we were to go through the merge process for these guys,
we'd end up copying the entire left array
into the temporary array,
and then we copy the entire right array
into the temporary array, 'cause essentially,
because all the elements in the left array
are smaller than all the elements in the right array
to merge them, we just need to stick them together.
We just need to copy the left array
and then the right array.
But remember that after that, we would copy
the merged array back into the original array.
Into the positions that are already occupied
by these guys and what that means is,
we're not gonna change the original array in any way
'cause we're just gonna end up copying the elements back
in the same order they're already in.
And so for example for our array,
one of the partitions, as we saw in the slides,
is seven and 55.
And seven and 55 is going to be partitioned
into two arrays, right?
Seven, and 55, and so when we come in to this merge,
with the left array being seven,
and the right array being 55,
we're gonna compare input mid minus one,
which will give us seven, with input mid,
which will give us 55.
Now because 55 is greater than seven,
what we would do is copy seven to the temporary array,
and then we copy 55 to the temporary array,
so we end up with seven and 55, we end up with them
in the exact same order they're already in.
And then we're gonna copy them back
into the two positions they're currently occupied.
And so basically we're doing needless work.
And so, what this is saying is,
if everything in the left array is smaller
than everything in the right array,
then the merged array, is just going to be
the left array followed by the right array.
And so, none of the positions of the elements
are going to change.
And so when we copy back the temp array,
we're gonna be copying the same elements
back to the same positions,
so we don't actually have to do anything.
When we get to seven, merging seven and 55,
we don't have to do anything, they're already in
their correct sorted positions, relative to each other.
And so that's what this optimization is doing.
It's saying, it's stopping us from going ahead
and merging our left and right array,
when we don't have to do that,
because the result of the merge is going to equal
what we already have in the input array, okay.
And this works because we know at this point
that both the left and right partitions are sorted.
If they weren't sorted, we couldn't do this check.
Alright, so if that's not the case,
it means that we have some elements in the left array
that are greater, than some of the elements
in the right array, so we have merging to do.
'Cause some of the positions of the elements
are going to change, when we do the merge.
And so we're going to initialise, I to start,
just like we did in the slides.
We're gonna initialise J to mid,
and we're gonna have this new temp index,
that we're gonna initialise to zero.
And this is going to keep track of where we are
in the temporary array, when we're doing the copy.
So now we're gonna create our temporary array,
so we'll say int temp.
Int temp equals new int and the lengths will be
end minus start, we need this to be large enough
to hold the number of elements in the left
and right partitions, and so, if we're doing
the whole array, end will be seven and start will be zero
so we'll end up with a integer array of seven
and that's what we want.
And then what we're going to do, is,
we're going to step through the left and right arrays
and we're gonna compare whatever is at index I,
in the left array, with whatever is at index J,
in the right array.
And we're going to write the smaller of the two
into the current position in temp.
Which we're keeping track of with temp index,
so we're gonna say, while I is less than mid,
and J is less than end.
And we're gonna say temp.
Temp index plus plus, equals, while if input I,
is less than or equal to input J,
then we wanna write whatever is at I,
into the temporary array,
because it's the smaller of the two.
And so we're gonna say.
And so we're going to assign input I plus plus,
to temp, temp index otherwise,
we're gonna assign input J plus plus, to temp.
And so to review what's going on here,
when I equals mid, we'll have finished
traversing the left array.
So as soon as we've finished traversing the left array
we wanna drop out or, as soon as we finish traversing
the right array, we wanna drop out.
So once we have finished completely traversing
either the left or the right array,
we're gonna drop out of the loop,
and don't worry, we'll handle any
left over elements in a minute.
So assuming that hasn't happened,
we're going to compare the current element
in the left partition which we're keeping track of
which element that is with I,
we're gonna compare that with the current element
in the right partition, which we're keeping
track of with J, and we're gonna write the smaller
of the two to the temporary array.
Now because merge sort is stable, we have the equals here.
And so, if the element in the left array,
is equal to the element in the right array
it will be written first, and that's how we preserve
the relative ordering of duplicate items.
If we didn't have this equals here,
this would become unstable.
And so if input I is less than or equal to input J,
we're gonna assign input I to the current position
in temp and then we're gonna increment the temp index
and we're gonna increment I.
'Cause now we wanna move on to the next element
in the left partition.
But if input J is the smaller of the two,
so that means that input J, the element
in the right partition is less than the element
in the left partition, then we'll write the element
in the right partition.
And then of course we'll increment J,
we'll increment the temp index.
So we're doing what you saw in the slides,
we're traversing through the left and right partitions
and on each test we write the smaller element
between the left and the right into the temp array
and by always the always writing the smaller element
at the end the temp array will contain elements
from the left and right partitions in sorted order
and we'll have sorted, so we'll have merged
the two partitions and the resulting partition
will be sorted.
Now because we're dropping out of the loop,
when we've completely traversed the one of the arrays,
the other array or partition, sub array,
however you wanna call it,
the other one will have some elements left over
that we have not copied in to temp
and so we have to handle that now.
And this just going to be the second optimization.
This is going to be handling the remaining elements
in the array that we have in traverse.
Now the optimization is that if we have elements
remaining in the left partition,
we have to copy them into the temp array.
But, if we have elements remaining in the right partition
we don't have to do anything.
And you might be thinking, well why not?
Its kind of the same situation that we had
with the first optimization.
When we're copying the elements back,
we're copying them back into the positions
that are covered by the left and right partitions, so.
Okay, so let me do an example on the fly here.
So let's say, we're merging these two arrays.
So we're merging 32 and 34 in on the right side,
we have 33 and 36, let's say.
So this is the left side, this is the right side,
they're in sorted order, each array,
because we're always merging sorted partitions.
So when we do the merge,
we compare 32 to 33, well 32 is the smaller of the two,
so we'd write 32, and then we'll compare 34 to 33,
well, 33 is the smaller of the two,
so we'll write 33, we'll compare 34 to 36,
34 is the smaller, so we'll write 34 and at this point
we would drop out of the loop,
because we've completely finished traversing the left array.
We haven't handled 36, 36 isn't here,
but we don't need to, because remember, we're gonna copy,
temporary array back into the four positions
that these guys currently occupy.
And if you'll notice, if we were to add 36 in here,
then when we copy the temporary array
back into the input array, we'd be overwriting 36
with 36, so once again, we'd be doing needless work.
If we have elements left over in the right array,
that means that all of the elements
that are left over in the right array will be greater,
than everything that's already been copied.
Because remember, we're always copying the smallest
of the elements, so if we have elements left over
in the right, we know that they're greater
than everything else, that's why
they haven't been copied yet.
And so, if we've completely seen the left array,
anything left over in the right array, is greater
than everything we've already copied.
And so, whatever's left over, its position
in the input array, is not going to change,
as a result of the merge.
And so if we were to take any left over elements
in the right array, copy them into temp
and then copy them back, we're doing needless work again,
because you know, we're copying elements
back into the same positions they occupied before.
And so, we don't have to worry about handling
any left over elements in the right array.
Their positions in the input array will not change
as a result of the merge, but that's not true
of the left array.
If we have elements left over in the left array,
then those elements are greater than everything
we're already written and so, obviously
we need to write those, because their positions
are going to change, let me see if I can come up
with an example of that.
I'll put the 36 here, and I'll put 34 here I guess.
And so let's do it again.
So we're gonna write 32 and then we're gonna write 33,
and then we're gonna write 34.
And at this point, we have finished traversing
the right array, and you'll see that we have 36 left over,
well we have to handle that
because its position is gonna change.
It's going to go from coming second,
when we're looking at these four numbers,
to coming fourth.
And so when we copy the temporary array
back tot he original array, the input array,
the position of 36 will have to change.
And so once again, if it's elements in the left array
that are left over, we know that those elements
are greater than everything that's already
been written and so basically all those elements
need to jump over whatever is in the right array.
So their positions are going to change.
So if there are elements left over in the left array
we have to handle them.
We have to copy them into the temp array.
But if there are elements left over
in the right array, we don't have to.
Because their positions in the original array
aren't going to change, and so,
we'd be doing needless work,
if we copied them to temp and copied them back.
Now, when we do the copy, we copy the remaining
left elements in the left array over.
We're not actually gonna copy them into temp.
Because as I just explained, basically,
they'll jump over all of the elements
that we've copied so far and so we can just do that copy
within the input array.
We know the positions we need to copy to.
And so we're gonna use system dot array copy.
The first parameter is the source array
and that'll be our input array,
and then we're gonna start the copy at position I,
because that will be, if there are left over elements
in the left array, this is the first index
of the first element that we still haven't handled.
And then out destination array will be the input array
and we're gonna copy to start plus temp index.
This is our destination index
and temp index has basically counted
how many elements we've handled.
And so the destination position for any elements
in the left array that are gonna basically jump over
all of the elements in the temporary array
is star plus temp index.
So if we're merging two two element arrays
and we've copied three elements into the temporary array
and we have that one left over element
in the left array, the left partition
that we haven't handled, well,
we'll add three to the start index
and so it'll be copied into the original input array
after the elements that we're gonna copy in
from the temp array.
So we don't actually copy and left over elements
in the left partition into the temp array.
We just copy them directly into where they'd end up,
in the input array.
And the lengths that we're gonna write is mid minus I.
This tells us the number of elements
that we didn't copy over into the temp array
from the left partition.
Now if we completely traversed the left array,
this will end up being zero,
and so we won't actually do a copy here, okay.
And if we didn't completely traversed the right array,
once again, this array copy won't do anything
because this isn't paying any attention to J,
it's just handling the left array.
So if there are no leftover elements in the left array
this won't do anything, if there are
left over elements in the left array,
this will copy them directly
from one location in the input array,
to another location in the input array,
it'll essentially jump over the elements we're gonna copy
from the temp array and write any remaining elements
in the left array.
And so our final step is to copy over the temp array.
So we're gonna say system dot array copy.
Our source array will be the temp array.
We're gonna start at zero, 'cause we wanna copy
from the beginning, the target will be the input array.
We're gonna copy starting at the start,
because remember, we're going to replace
when we do the merge we're handling position
start to end in the input array,
and so we're gonna start at start.
And the length we're gonna copy is temp index.
So we're only going to copy the number of elements
that we actually copied into the temp array.
We're not gonna copy the entire temp array.
And so, in this first array copy, here,
we're copying here up to temp index
and then here, if there are any left over elements
in the left array, we're starting at start plus temp index
and that's it.
That's our merge sort.
So let's call this, after all of that, let's hope this works
so we'll call merge sort.
We're gonna call it with our int array,
our start will be zero, and our end will be
int array dot length.
Let's give this a whirl.
And there we go, minus twenty two, minus fifteen,
one, seven, twenty, thirty five and fifty five.
Now, I think probably the most difficult part
to understand here, apart from how the recursion
is working, but you can review the recursion slides,
is perhaps what's going on here.
I think the key thing to understand here is
when we're merging a partition,
we're gonna copy the merged values
back into those same positions.
And so, the optimization down here, is,
if the greater values are already towards the right,
so they're already in the, at the end
of the right partition, their positions aren't gonna change
so there's no need to do the extra work
of copying them to the temp array
and copying them back.
And then if we have left over elements
in the left array, instead of copying
the left overs, let's say 55 would be left over here,
if we were to merge these two arrays, seven and 55
in one and minus 22, 55 is gonna get left here.
Because it's greater, so, we'll end up writing
minus 22, one and seven, to the temp array
and then 55 will be left over,
well instead of copying 55, to the end
of the temporary array, we take it,
and we directly copy it here.
'Cause we know that's where it's gonna end up.
And so that's what this line is doing here.
It's saying start with the input array,
start at I and I would be equal to the position of 55,
and then add start in temp index so we'd add three
to the start index, 'cause we've handled three elements,
so our start index would be here,
so we're gonna go one, two, three.
And that's where we're gonna copy 55 to.
And at that point, mid minus I would give us one.
And so we'd just copy that one element.
And so instead of copying 55 to the temp array
and then copying it back in, as we copy the temp array
in this step here, we just take 55
and we just plop it right in there.
And then on the second array copy,
we copy the temporary array.
So we'd copy minus 22, one and seven.
And 55 would already be sitting here, so,
you've seen me go through algorithms
or implementations on slides
going through code by hand is a fantastic way
to learn what the code is doing
and so if you're confused by any of this,
go through a couple of iterations using pen and paper.
Normally you don't have to do through the entire sorting
of the array just doing one of two calls will give you
a feel for what the implementation is doing.
And keep in mind that this is recursive
and so, if you're having trouble understanding
what this is doing, review the slides on recursion.
But that's merge sort.
It's doing a lot of work, it looks deceptively simple
but as I said in the recursion video,
three lines of code, of two lines of code,
when you're dealing with recursion can deal
to hundreds of calls, so there can be a lot
going on under the covers.
Alright, so let's move on now to the second algorithm
that uses divide and conquer,
I'll see you in the next video.